i really just you know i'm sure i'm
going to get some negative feedback from
this
and that's okay i'm not asking anybody
to live my life
but i'll tell you what i live my life
and i'll be damned if i'll have anybody
else tell me how to live it
living with and confronting the
stupidity
of our fellow human beings is an
intermittent but very important part
of life no matter what your political
persuasion and very often stupidity
is combined with dogmatic certainty
with a sense of total inerrant
self-confidence whether you are
left-wing
right-wing or a nihilistic pragmatist
somewhere in the middle
like myself have you ever had a
conversation with someone
who insisted to you that it is a
well-established fact
that islam is a religion of peace and
there isn't a single word about jihad
in the quran this is a later corruption
of their religion
have you ever had a conversation of this
kind with somebody
if not ask yourself
how you would cope with it let's add
some elements of
unequal worldly authority to this what
if the conversation is with a colleague
at work
what if it's with your boss with your
employer
someone who has power over you what if
it's not another student at your
university
what if you have this conversation with
your professor why do these people have
such dogmatic certainty
yes it may be that they have read other
people saying this
in any text but in most cases it is just
because they have the experience of
saying it themselves so many times
perhaps just
verbally saying it to their friends and
colleagues and family
and having other people affirm that what
they're saying is good and reasonable
and true
or here on the internet in typewritten
form they may have made this
same statement again and again again and
they cultivate they develop
a defiance sense of certainty
in what it is they're saying the way
that i was raised the way that my family
taught me
is that everything has a spirit
so to take a life of a plant is no
different than to take the life
of an animal i have been in the
situation of presenting a lecture
about buddhist philosophy in which my
expertise
and my depth of experience and knowledge
is demonstrated during the lecture
and at the end of the lecture i got a
question from somebody with a phd
in the audience i believe his phd was
from
a university in france someone with a
mainstream
european education who said oh well
during your lecture you said that in
buddhism
people believe that they go to hell
after they die
but that's impossible because buddhists
believe in reincarnation
now this is partly funny to me because
this is supposedly an erudite
sophisticated person with a with a phd
but it's funny to me also because what
came up in my lecture
what i said explicitly the lecture
wasn't about hell
but i gave this as an example of how
european misconceptions about buddhism
can be
so far removed from both what the
ancient texts say
and also what you can see very easily
the modern
religion still consists of to this day
so the concept of hell just so you know
it isn't just
in the ancient text and ancient
philosophy if you just go to thailand
and walk around some buddhist temples
you're going to see huge paintings and
huge dioramas of hell
so it's hard to ignore but a lot of
white western modern people convince
themselves
that there's no concept of hell in
buddhism or that this is a later
corruption
misconception that crept into the
religion in the original buddha
in the same way there are plenty of
modern white western people
who convinced themselves that islam is
some tremendously virtuous religion and
that muhammad
was some tremendously virtuous religious
leader but that everything wrong with
islam is only a later corruption or
later misconception and we shouldn't
blame the religion as such now
if you were to respond to this by asking
in effect how do you know
what you think you know you're in a very
difficult position right especially
when there are inequalities of authority
involved very often
the most fundamental question we can try
to get at when coping with the stupidity
of our fellow man is the origin of their
ignorance
in a sense the origin of their false
certainty
in what is they think they know is to
get at the epistemology
of their beliefs and to challenge that
either with our own
epistemology or with our nihilism about
the subject the difficult part of the
process
is asking yourself what is
the most fundamental question here what
is the most fundamental problem
i can i can approach so i got a sincere
message in from a member of the audience
who wrote saying
i once heard you say paraphrasing and
once again baffled and horrified by the
stupidity of my fellow man
it is with this feeling of horror with
which i pose to you this question
when i listen to people like this i feel
like i'm about to have a panic attack
the mental dexterity with which she so
unashamedly switches
between hippie spiritualist garbage and
a dangerously misinterpreted
evolutionary survival of the fittest
mentality
truly makes me cringe with pain
do you feel this way when listening to
such people if not
why not if so what traits of character
do you cultivate
in order to be able to listen
sympathetically and then respond to this
woman in a respectful way
the only option apparent to me is to
scoff and sneer
and pretend like it doesn't faze me at
all but that might just be
my maturity so from my perspective what
i'm doing
in my response to this youtuber is not
listening sympathetically
and it's not responding to her in a
respectful way
what i'm trying to do is ignore
all of the relatively shallow
sources of conflict to deal with the
most fundamental
the most profound conflict the most
profound problem
that's presented here now right up on
the surface here
you're looking at a pair of fake breasts
it is not merely a fact that this woman
has had
plastic surgery to install fake breasts
she is choosing to feature those fake
breasts
prominently in this very video
and her philosophy of returning
to a pre-industrial ancient
traditional subsistence mode of hunting
and gathering
refusing to use items made in factories
refuse to eat food
produced in a factory this obviously is
an incongruous
contrast to her makeup her eyebrows
her teeth but most of all her breasts
and again these are fake breasts she
doesn't conceal
but is actively exploiting here on
youtube and on instagram
as part of her path to fame shall we say
there's no doubt some portion of her
audience a social media influencer
is based on her appearance and is based
on this kind of artifice
and technology that is beneath her skin
and very much being presented on camera
now there are other things
right up on the surface you could
criticize the camera
the computer the youtube channel did you
get a good look at the
the bow and arrow she's using here this
isn't a traditional
handmade bow the fur coats she wears she
models
her coats underneath she shows off
herself wearing fur coats
they look nothing like an 18th century
fur coat these fur coats are themselves
the products of modern technology and
really horrible chemical treatment by
the way makes it possible for us to have
this kind of fur in the modern world
that's not what historical or ancient
fur looked like
that's not what ancient bow hunting
looked like there's a whole lot
wrong with this if you were actually an
insider in her ideology and worldview
and yes of course there are strange
questions about cultural appropriation
and genocide
and the relationship between white
westerners
and indigenous native americans there
are a lot of questions
up on the surface that could be asked
and in my response
i raised absolutely none of them i tried
to address
what is most fundamental here and my
method is not
to be the most sympathetic i don't
really think i'm sympathizing with her
quite the contrary
it's not to be respectful either i don't
think
i'm being respectful to her but i think
i am issuing
i am avoiding all of those shallower
sources of potential confrontation to
instead confront her only
on what i think is the most fundamental
question what you call
nature in quotation marks is just an
idea
in your head and something written out
on a chalkboard
by human hands what you call nature
and what you call the creator is not
something natural
but something artificial in every sense
of the word it is an artifice that you
insist
is more real than reality itself
in that belief you find a sense of
dignity you take
pride in being a believer and that
is your personal tragedy i think it is
fair to say
that in a society where we are
surrounded by
very stupid very dogmatic people
most of us live our lives avoiding
this kind of conflict and i think the
reason why
people avoid it isn't that they're shy
it's that whenever they have these
conflicts they let themselves get caught
up
in the relatively shallow relatively
meaningless
sources of consternation that are up on
the surface they confront someone like
this
but they just confront them about their
fake breasts or the fact that they still
use saran wrap or they have nail polish
or their hunting knife comes from a
factory or whatever it is
and you know there's a sense in which i
mean those those
sources of conflict they're meaningful
enough that in the moment
they may seem totally engrossing and
totally overwhelming you may not
perceive yourself
as having a meaningless fight about
nothing at all
but afterwards as time goes on you start
to live a life in which you are more and
more a reckless more and more withdrawn
from the society of your fellow human
beings
because your fellow human beings are 99
of them deeply committed to ideologies
that are just as incoherent
just as stupid and in many cases
actually
much more dangerous have you ever been
in the situation
of debating with a family member whether
or not they should be taking
antidepressants
have you ever been in the situation of
debating with a family member whether or
not they should be taking
antidepressants
during pregnancy have you ever been in
the situation of debating with a family
member
whether or not they should be putting
their child on ritalin
people subscribe to beliefs that very
often are contradicted
by just reading the label on the
medicine itself
they believe that the medicine has
benefits that the manufacturer the
medicine doesn't claim it offers
they refuse to admit that the medicine
has negative side effects that
even the label itself says that are very
well scientifically established and that
the
manufacturer has admitted it has these
negative side effects right
people get committed to these beliefs in
a manner that is really no different
from religion
even though they are obviously
completely modern air sats belief
systems
made up to serve our own self-interests
short term in the 21st century
and it's very easy for people to instead
respond
in a shallow manner they may not feel or
perceive it as shallow
themselves not we are just attacking
something about the person's motivations
something about their particular
misconceptions
or something but the consequences of
their misconceptions so it might be very
easy
to react to someone who says this about
islam by just saying
well you only think that because you
read left-wing newspapers like the
guardian
even if that's true it's not that
productive
right uh you might respond to us saying
oh well
what you want us to do is just surrender
and hand over control
of the middle east to isis and other
muslim fundamentalist groups now this
may or may not be true of the person who
died they may or may not have a
political position
that the american armed forces should
just abandon places like afghanistan
places like iraq and syria to whatever
local political extremists or religious
extremists
might hold sway there that might or
might not be and that might or might not
be
an implication of what they're saying so
you can attack the implications you can
attack
their character you can very easily get
caught up in things that are not so
so fundamental and most of the time
the more fundamental questions will
bring us closer to that
epistemological conceit of
how do i know what i think i know
and the way in which you can win the
argument
even with a very stupid person is to
show look my perspective is better than
yours
because it relies on fewer assumptions
fewer leaps of inference my epistemology
my way of knowing what it is i think i
know
is better than yours even if you
disagree with me
on the level of values beliefs
assertions
political projects your vision of what
the future ought to be your vision of
what's wrong with the past
so on and so forth the easiest thing for
everyone to do
the most comfortable thing for everyone
to do is just to avoid these conflicts
altogether
but there's another approach you can
take
and that is to resolve that you're not
going to have
a shallow self-defeating contest of egos
that you're not going to get trapped up
on those surface issues that you're
instead going to focus on
the most profound the most fundamental
issues so no matter how the conversation
goes it's going to come to conclusions
that are really of meaningful long-term
value for both people
engaged in the conversation and what do
all these examples have in common
ultimately it's epistemology ultimately
it's a question of
how do i know what i think i know
what you think you know about this drug
that you're taking during pregnancy or
this drug you're giving to your teenage
kid or whatever it is
what you think you know is contradicted
by what's written on the label
so let's talk about why are you so
certain like why are you angry at me
why do you think you know that and turn
it around because sometimes you're going
to be the one
who's angry sometimes you're going to be
the one who's contemptuous and what's
really worth discussing what's really
worth debating is
why do i have no respect for you in your
opinion let's talk about that
let's talk about why why am i dismissing
what you're telling me
well there are reasons you know and
those are much more fundamental and much
more profound
than some of these things on the surface
that may completely engross us
and draw us into internacing pointless
hostilities
with any of these discussions and i do
ask myself this in making youtube videos
that make a lot of people uncomfortable
ask yourself who is this challenging for
who is this uncomfortable for
and who is made comfortable by avoiding
this conflict
who am i making uncomfortable about this
and why
and as you go on in life some of your
teenagers watching this
this is hard to see one of the greatest
evils that can befall your fellow man
is simply that they get too
comfortable the type of dogmatism we see
whether it's any of these examples
people repeating what they think they
know about islam
what they think they know about buddhism
what they think they know about
mind-altering drugs whether it's
marijuana
or antidepressants all right yes it's
the product
of living a life where they say these
things again and again
and have them affirmed or at least have
them pass unchallenged
by the other people in their lives they
grow more and more
certain and as years turn into decades
what had once been a questioning and
curious attitude
in their youth becomes through
sheer dent of comfort a tremendously
narrow
middle-aged mind
[Music]
maybe we can we can practice